THE SUN OF THE HEART AND THE BAI-RO-RGYUD-’BUM*
Matthew T. Kapstein
EPHE, Vème Section

Background

In recent years we have seen much progress in scholarship clarifying the historical development of the Rdzogs-chen traditions of contemplative practice. Not long ago, this topic was, to quote Churchill in a context he never dreamt of, “a riddle wrapped in a mystery inside an enigma,” but now — thanks in large measure to the initial impetus provided by the late Herbert Guenther’s interpretations of the writings of Klong-chen Rab-’byams-pa (1308-64); to the pioneering contributions on the early formation of the Rdzogs-chen of Samten G. Karmay, to whom the present work is dedicated; and to the access to traditional instruction pro-vided by some of the leading contemporary teachers of Rdzogs-chen meditation —, we face instead many particular riddles contained within a field whose general features no longer appear to be so mysterious as for-merly they did. 1 One of these particular puzzles is the collection of Rdzogs-chen tantras from the library of Rtogs-ldan Rinpoche that was published in 1971 under the title The Rgyud ’Bum of Vairocana (hereinafter: Bai-ro-rgyud-’bum). As the introductory remarks accompanying that work made clear, the collection had obvious affinities with the then known edition of the Rnying-ma-rgyud-’bum, but also included many tantras not identified in the available cata-logue of ’Jigs-med-gling-pa (1730-1798).2 Questions surrounding the orignal provenance of the collection, the period and lineage in which it was compiled, remained unanswered.

In the course of my work on the English version of the late Bdud-’joms Rin-po-che’s Rnying-ma’i chos-’byung, I became intrigued by references to the transmission of Rdzogs-chen materials in the Zur lineage, particularly during the 12th century. In the accompanying bibliography (Dudjom 1991 
II: 269), I hazarded the guess that one of the works mentioned in the hagi-ography of Zhig-po Bdud-rtsis (1143-1199), namely, the Sun of the Heart of Contemplation (Bsam-gtan snying-gi nyi-ma, Dudjom 1991 I: 654), could be identified with a similarly titled text, the first text in fact contained in the Bai-ro-rgyud-’bum, which is entitled Paṇ-sgrub-rnams-kyi thugs-bcud snying-gi nyi-ma, the Sun of the Heart Which is the Essential Spirit of the Scholars and Saints. 3

This guess led me to comment speculatively to several colleagues about the possible provenance of the Bai-ro-rgyud-’bum, and this snyan brgyud came to be published, and later cited, without my prior knowledge or permission.4  I am now fairly convinced that my original hunch was in 
essence correct, and in the body of this essay will attempt to substantiate this, at the same time drawing out what conclusions might be warranted for our thinking about the history of the Rdzogs-chen tradition and the Bai-ro-rgyud-’bum itself, while also now providing interested colleagues with an appropriate citation.

The Sun of the Heart

The Sun of the Heart opens with a short introduction (3.1 - 4.1), in which two Tibetan bhikṣu-s, Bai-ro-tsa-na (Vairocana) and his companion Legs-grub, are in the course of receiving instruction from Shri Sing-nga-pra-pa-ta (Śrī Siṃha) in the assembly hall of Ha-he-na-ku-sha (Dhahena).5

Coming to the exposition of the esoteric instructions in the area of mind (man-ngag sems-phyogs), he perceives that it is the time for Tibet to be tamed by this teaching, and so he imparts six particular teachings to them:

1. Rig-pa khu-byug
2. Rtsal-chen sprugs-pa
3. Khyung-chen lding-ba
4. Rdo-la gser-zhun
5. Mi-nub rgyal-mtshan nam-mkha’-che
6. Rmad-du byung-ba.

With the original circumstances in which the teaching was imparted to the Tibetans thus described, the text launches into a series of expositions of the first five texts just enumerated, providing also brief indications regarding the qualities of the guru and appropriate circumstances for practice. It fre-quently describes these teachings as having been transmitted from Kun-u-bzang-po to Dga’-rab-rdo-rje, and sometimes thence to ’Jam-dpal-bshes-gnyen. 6 I shall not discuss here in detail the identifications of the texts that are referred to by the titles just mentioned: the relationship between the first five titles and the five corresponding teachings is made very clear in the Sun of the Heart itself, and these five, moreover, correspond to the list of five “earlier translations of the Mental Class” found in many Rnying-ma-pa works7 — the Rig-pa khu-byug and Rdo-la gser-zhun in particular are now very well known to contemporary students of Rdzogs-chen. 8

The sixth, the text called Rmad-du byung-ba, a phrase that occurs in the titles of several Sems-sde tantras, is also usually included in the later lists of tantras trans-mitted by Śrī Siṃha to Bai-ro-tsa-na. 9

This series of five teachings, which comprise more than half of the Sun of the Heart (to 104.6), is followed by a disquisition on “exegetical methods in general” (spyir bshad-thabs), explained in terms of the “aural transmis-sions relating to view, meditation, conduct and result” (lta-bsgom-spyod ’bras-kyi snyan-(b)rgyud, 105.1-120.6). This subject-matter is further ampli-fied by a group of brief commentaries and outlines on four Rdzogs-chen tantras, each given with its title in the vulgar Sanskrit often found in Ti-betan works of this period, but with alternative titles at the end of each work. The texts in question are: 

1. ’Bras bu rin po che dang mnyam pa’i rgyud kyi dka’ ’grel, also called Rin po che za ma tog ’bar ba (121.1 - 127.3).
2. Lta ba ye shes mdzod chen chos kyi dbyings, also called Rin po che ’phrul gyi lde mig (127.3 - 130.5).
3. Bsgom pa ye shes gsal ba chos kyi dbyings, also called Yang gsang thugs kyi lde mig (130.5 - 132.6).
4. Spyod pa ye shes ’bar ba chos kyi dbyings, also called Zab mo mchog gi lde mig (133.1 - 134.5).

The texts of the tantras commented upon here are included in the second volume of the Bai-ro-rgyud-’bum.10

Finally, it is of great interest that the work closes with an extended dis-cussion of “exegetical methods for explaining the precepts” (man-ngag bshad-pa’i bshad-thabs, 134.5 - 172.3). Here it treats of five major topics, ex-plaining the teaching in terms of the significance of: (1) the history (lo-rgyus, 135.1 - 164.3), (2) the root [of the teaching, i.e. byang-chub-kyi sems] (rtsa-ba, 164.3 -6), (3) yoga (rnal-’byor, 166.2-169.3),11 (4) the purpose (dgos-ched,166.2-169.3) and (5) the words themselves (tshig), in fact a commentary on the Rig-pa’i khu-byug, referred to here as the “text” (gzhung, 169.3 -172.3). The first and fullest of these sections is of special importance, as it is certainly one of the earliest relatively well-developed histories of the Rdzogs-chen traditions, it establishes the provenance of the work within the early Zur lineage, and it seems clearly related to the later expanded biographies of Bai-ro-tsa-na, known generally under the title ’Dra-’bag 
chen-mo.12 To call this a “history,” however, is perhaps misleading, for thisinclusion of occasional myths and legends. It opens with a version of the well-known Rdzogs-chen account of the primordial enlightenment of the buddha Samantabhadra,13 and then lists the succession of teachers of the Rdzogs-chen in India, providing only brief remarks on the circumstances of transmission from Samantabhadra through Mañjuśrīmitra (135.3-138.6). The entire lineage in India is as follows, and will be seen to resem-ble closely the list derived from the ’Dra-’bag chen-mo as given by Kar-may.14

1. Kun-tu-bzang-po (Samantabhadra)
2. Rdo-rje-sems-dpa’ (Vajrasattva)
3. Dga’-rab-rdo-rje (Dudjom 1991 I: 490-494)
4. ’Jam-dpal-bshes-gnyen (=Mañjuśrīmitra, Dudjom 1991 I: 493-493)
5. Rgyal-po ’Da’-he-na-ta 
6. Sras thu-bo Ha-ti (Rājahasti)
7. Sras-mo Pa-ra-ni
8. Rgyal-po Yon-tan-lag-gi bu-mo Gnod-sbyin-mo byang-chub
9. Rmad-’tshong-ma Par-na
10. Kha-che’i mkhan-po Rab-snang
11. U-rgyan-gyi mkhan-po Ma-ha-ra-tsa (= King Indra-bhūti)
12. Sras-mo Go-ma-de-byi (Princess Gomadevī)
13. A-rya A-lo-ke
14. Khyi’i rgyal-po Gu-gu-ra-tsa (Kukkurāja) 
15. Drang-srong Ba-sha-ti (= ṛṣi Bhāṣita)
16. Rmad-’tshong-ma Bdag-nyid-ma
17. Na-ga-’dzu-na (Nāgārjuna)
18. Gu-gu-ra-tsa phyi-ma (the later Kukkurāja)
19. ’Jam-dpal-bshes-gnyen phyi-ma (the later Mañjuśrī-mitra)
20. Lha’i mkhan-po Ma-ha-ra (Devarāja)
21. Bud-dha-kug-ta (Buddhagupta)
22. Shri Sing-nga (Śrī Siṃha)
23. Dge-slong-ma Kun-dga’-ma
24. Bye-ma-la-mu-tra (Vimalamitra)
25. ’Phags-pa Bai-ro-tsa-na

The Sun of the Heart further specifies (138.6) that numbers 18-24 constitute the “lineage of seven,” with Bai-ro-tsa-na as the eighth added to this group. 

There are many interesting features of this list, which merits a much fuller analysis than space permits here. I confine myself to two topics of 
interest:

(a) As its inclusion in the ’Dra-’bag chen-mo demonstrates, some know-ledge of the lineage as given here was preserved through at least the 14th century, though the Rnying-ma-pa historians who do refer to it tend to ab-breviate it, mentioning the figures 4-24 only as an enumeration of twenty-one, twenty-three, or twenty-five generations, among whom few particular names are given.15 This sometimes results in the enumeration of the inter-vening generations being forgotten altogether: in the Gsan-yig of Gter-bdag-gling-pa (1646-1714), for instance, the Rdzogs-chen-sems-sde lineage passes directly from ’Jam-dpal-bshes-gnyen through Śrī Siṃha to Bai-ro-tsa-na, although the lineage in Tibet that follows is closely similar to that given in the Sun of the Heart.16 The figures in the lineage in India who were still to some extent remembered seem to have been those also mentioned in connection with the traditions of Mahāyoga and Anuyoga, certainly the most important aspects of the Zur-lugs for the later Rnying-ma Bka’-ma tra-dition.17

(b) Some of the relatively obscure figures mentioned, for instance, the nun Kun-dga’-ma, are also known to Gnubs-chen Sangs-rgyas-ye-shes’s Bsam-gtan mig-sgron.18 Moreover, the form of Buddhagupta’s name, Bud-dha-kug-ta, conforms with other relatively early sources, including once again Gnubs-chen.19 This seems to suggest that the Sun of the Heart belongs to a stratum in the history of the Rdzogs-chen still close to that of the Bsam-gtan mig-sgron, which indeed was also current within the early Zur tradi-tion.20

Following the enumeration of the lineage in India, the lengthiest part of  the history is given over to a biography of Bai-ro-tsa-na, treating especially of his exile in Rgyal-mo-rong in the east, and his disciple G.yu-sgra Snying-po (138.6 - 163.5). This entire section of the work merits careful comparison with the account of Bai-ro-tsa-na in the later ’Dra-bag chen-mo, of which the Sun of the Heart is possibly one of the prototypes.21 The historical discussion then closes with an enumeration of the lineage from G.yu-sgra onwards (163.5 - 164.3). Knowledge of the figures mentioned here was, of course, very well preserved in the later tradition.22

27. Bsnyags-gnya’ (Gnyags Jñānakumāra)
28. Sog-po Lha-dpal-gyi-ye-shes
29. Bsnubs (Gnubs) Sangs-rgyas-ye-shes
30a. Thugs-kyi sras bzhi (Pa-gor Blon-chen ’Phags-pa, So Yes-shes (sic!) dbang-phyug, Sru Legs-pa’i sgron-ma, Bsnubs Khung-lung (Khu-lung) Yon-tan-rgya-mtsho; 
cf. Dudjom 1991 I: 612-615)
30b. Sras Ye-shes-rgya-mtsho
31. Myang-mi Shes-rab-mchog
32. Myang Ye-’byung
33. Zur Sha-kya-’byung-gnas
34. Rtse-mo lnga dang rtse-kog (Zhang ’Gos-chung, Me-myag ’Byung-grags (Khyung-’dra), Gzad Shes-rab-rgyal-po, Tsag Bla-ma, Zur-chung Shes-rab-grags-pa; cf. Dudjom 1991 I: 622, where the text reads rtse-mo bzhi dang rtse-kog-gcig, the last being Tsag Bla-ma)
35. Ka-bzhi gdung-brgyad (only the “four pillars” (ka-bzhi) are listed here: Skyo-ston Shakya ye-shes, Yang-kher (Yang-kheng) bla-ma, Rlan Shakya bzang-po, Mda’-dig Chos-shag (Mda’-tig Jo-shāk); cf. Dudjom 1991 I: 642, where the “eight rafters” (gdung-brgyad) are also enumerated.)
36. Lha-rje Mda’-tsha hor-po (= Zur Sgro-phug-pa)
37. Lce-ston Rgya-nag
38. Dbus-pa Shakya bla-ma

The list then closes with the characteristic phrase, des bdag la gnang ngo, “He bestowed it on me” (104.3). But who is this “me” that occupies the fi-nal position in the list? I would suggest that the name immediately pre-ceding, Dbus-pa Shakya bla-ma, is likely to be identified with one of Lce-ston Rgya-nag’s leading disciples, Dbus-pa Ston-śāk, who is most often referred to in the histories by his epithet Dam-pa Bse-sbrag-pa (Dudjom 1991 I: 651-2). If this is correct, the self-reference may be due to none other than Zhig-po Bdud-rtsis, who counted Ston-śāk among his teachers and who, as we have seen, was involved in the transmission of the Sun of the Heart of Contemplation. Should we understand this to mean that he is the probable author of our text? I do not think that we should rush to such a conclusion, for the references to the Sun of the Heart in the histories suggest that it was already more or in less in existence, perhaps as a sort of com-pendium of treasured Rdzogs-chen instructions of the Zur tradition, though Zhig-po Bdud-rtsis may well have played a role in its redaction in the form in which it is preserved in the Bai-ro-rgyud-’bum today.

Implications

What, if anything, does this tell us of the Bai-ro-rgyud-’bum itself? One could, I suppose, argue that in the course of rumaging through old manu-script collections the compiler of the Bai-ro-rgyud-’bum found this interest-ing old Sems-sde text and decided to include it, in which case it really tells us nothing at all about the history of the collection of which it is but a small part. I think, however, that such a scenario is rather unlikely, and does not reflect a viable approach to the historical analysis of Tibetan scriptural corpora. While some tantras may have incidentally entered the The Sun of the Heart 283 Bai-ro-rgyud-’bum in this way, it is unlikely that an expository work, that is not itself a tantra, would have come to occupy a preeminent position within the Bai-ro-rgyud-’bum in this fashion. It is on the whole better to suppose that our collection is derived from earlier collections, and that one of these prominently included the Sun of the Heart, prominently enough in fact so that it would come to be placed as the very first text in the first vo-lume of the Bai-ro-rgyud-’bum. Evidence of such a collection would plausi-bly point to the initial core which grew into the Bai-ro-rgyud-’bum. And, indeed, there is evidence of such a collection.

Let us now consider further the reference, mentioned earlier, to the Sun of the Heart of Contemplation in Dudjom Rinpoche’s History. It occurs in close connection with the mention of Zhig-po Bdud-rtsis’s study of the “Twenty-four Great Tantras of the Mental Class, including the All-Accomplishing King and the Ten Sūtras.” A generation later, his disciple Rta-ston Jo-ye (b. 1163) is reported to have “studied the Triple Cycle of the Mother and Sons, [which comprises] the All-Accomplishing King, the Ten Sūtras which are its exegetical tantras, and the four groups of exegetical tantras pertaining to the Tantra which Uproots Saṃsāra (’khor-ba rtsad-gcod-kyi rgyud) … and the commentaries on meditation [including] the Six Suns of the Heart (snying-gi nyi-ma drug)…” (Dudjom 1991 I: 658).23 This last title, I think, may also refer to our text, for as we have noticed above, its point of departure is the transmission of a group of six Rdzogs-chen tantras. Let us note, too, the conspicious presence in the first several volumes of the Bai-ro-rgyud-’bum of materials relating to the Kun-byed-rgyal-po and the ’Khor-ba rtsad-gcod cycle of tantras.24

Based upon what we have already seen, it is reasonable to assume that during the period with which we are here concerned, roughly the 12th century, there was an on-going process of compilation, within the Zur lineage, of texts and traditions connected with that tradition’s treasured teachings of the Rdzogs-chen Sems-sde, or Sems-phyogs, to use the expression that is actually employed within these texts.25 The initial parts of the Bai-ro-rgyud-’bum seem likely to have arisen as a result of this process, perhaps in one of the Western Tibetan lineages stemming from the Zur,26 so that what we find in the Bai-ro-rgyud-’bum today includes a truncated version of the Rdzogs-chen teachings of the Zur.

At the same time, we must note that large sections of the Bai-ro-rgyud-’bum appear to have no relation to the known Zur traditions. Franz-Karl Ehrhard has observed that a number of these tantras found in the Bai-ro-rgyud-’bum also appear in versions of the Rnying-ma’i rgyud-’bum recently located in Nepal.27 This may suggest some filiation among the textual traditions of the Rnying-ma-pa in the western parts of the Tibetan world, and perhaps the earlier existence of one or more collections that at some point were conjoined with the materials that, as I propose here, must de-rive from a branch of the Zur. In order to begin to sort out some of riddles that remain here, it will be no doubt useful to begin to compare our evi-dence regarding the Rdzogs-chen canons in West and Central Tibet with the available documents concerning the early Rdzogs-chen traditions of Kaḥ-thog.28 One hopes that the tracing of textual stemma on the basis of the available collections, in tandem with internal historical references, such as those I have indicated here, will permit us eventually to document the formation of the Rnying-ma Rdzogs-chen corpus in the crucial period from the 11th through 14th centuries. 

Given the importance of the Zur lineage in the history of the Rnying-ma Bka’-ma traditions,29 it remains puzzling that we have no evidence, so far as I have been able to locate to date, of later transmission, or even knowledge, of the Sun of the Heart, excepting of course the mere mention of the title in the histories.30 Even the Gsan-yig of the great Gter-dbag-gling-pa, in docu-menting the continuous transmission of the Zur tradition of the Rdzogs-chen, refers only to relatively late khrid-yig.31 One reason for this was no doubt the great success of the snying-thig traditions, which overshadowed the older approaches to the Rdzogs-chen, while absorbing much of their teaching.32 In the Sun of the Heart, for instance, we find much emphasis on bringing mind to rest in its natural state (sems-nyid rnal-du phebs-pa), a teaching that becomes formalized as part of the preliminary practice (sngon-’gro) in the snying-thig traditions and their offshoots. Moreover, the’Dra-‘bag chen-mo, in later times at least, no doubt supplanted whatever older biographies of Bai-ro-tsa-na were still to be found. The great interest shown by later Rdzogs-chen masters, particularly ’Jam-dbyangs Mkhyen-brtse’i dbang-po (1820-1892) and his disciples and colleagues, in the reco-very and renewal of old and even lost teachings known only from the historical record, never seems to have extended to the early Zur-lugs. 17