Tibetan Manuscript and Xylograph Traditions 
The Written Word and Its Media within the Tibetan Culture Sphere
Edited by Orna Almogi

Contents

Preface 3 
ORNA ALMOGI & DORJI WANGCHUK Prologue: Tibetan Textual Culture between Tradition and Modernity 5 
ORNA ALMOGI The rNying ma rgyud ’bum Set at the National Archives Kathmandu: The History of Its Production and Transmission 31
MICHELA CLEMENTE Different Facets of Mang yul Gung thang Xylographs 67
HILDEGARD DIEMBERGER Early Tibetan Printing in Southern La stod: Remarks on a 1407 Print Produced at Shel dkar 105
FRANZ-KARL EHRHARD Buddhist Hagiographies from the Borderlands: Further Prints from Mang yul Gung thang 127
AGNIESZKA HELMAN-WAżNY Overview of Tibetan Paper and Papermaking: History, Raw Materials, Techniques and Fibre Analysis 171
MATTHEW KAPSTEIN A Collection of Miscellaneous Kanjur Folios including Four Illustrated Pages from a rNying ma Tantra in statu nascendi 197
SAM VAN SCHAIK The Uses of Implements are Different: Reflections on the Functions of Tibetan Manuscripts 221
PETER SCHWIEGER Some Palaeographic Observations on Tibetan Legal Documents 243
MARTA SERNESI Reprinting the Buddhist Classics: On the Production and Circulation of Blockprints 267
TSUGUHITO TAKEUCHI & MAHO IUCHI Varieties of Tibetan Texts from Khara-khoto and Etsin-gol: An Introductory Remark 321
VESNA WALLACE Remarks on the Tibetan Language Manuscripts and Xylographs in Mongolia and on the Technology of Their Production 347
DORJI WANGCHUK Sacred Words, Precious Materials: On Tibetan Deluxe Editions of Buddhist Scriptures and Treatises 371

Preface

Textual scholarship, including text and book cultures, has a long and 
rich history throughout the Tibetan cultural sphere. Since the 
development of the Tibetan script—according to traditional sources 
sometime in the 7th century—tens (or perhaps hundreds) of thousands 
of texts, be they of Indic origin or autochthonous Tibetan, have been 
written down on Tibetan soil. Consequently, a much greater number 
of books, be they in the form of manuscripts or xylographs, were 
produced, transmitted, and further reproduced throughout the 
centuries. Tibetan textual scholarship thus becomes highly interesting 
and relevant for all of us who strive to gain a nuanced and well
founded knowledge of Tibetan intellectual culture, intellectual 
history, religion, philosophy, textual criticism, literature, or language. 
In recent years we have been witnessing a growing interest in 
Tibetan textual scholarship—including Tibetan text and book 
cultures—that goes beyond the mere textual and contentual matters. 
Issues concerning material and visual aspects of Tibetan book 
culture—including writing materials, economical and logistical 
aspects of production, patronage, codicology, palaeography, 
technology, craftsmanship, artistry, and art—and such concerning 
Tibetan text culture—including traditional textual scholarship in 
general and compilatory processes and editorial policies in 
particular—have come to the forefront of Tibetan Studies. Religious 
and sociological aspects of Tibetan book culture have likewise been 
increasingly addressed—particularly those focusing on the book as 
being a ritual or reverential object, an artefact possessing magical 
powers, a prestigious item to be owned, a merit-accruing object, or a 
piece of art. 

With the conviction that a better understanding of these aspects 
will advance and enhance Tibetan textual studies as a whole, a 
conference on “Manuscript and Xylograph Traditions within the 
Tibetan Cultural Sphere: Regional and Periodical Characteristics” 
was held at the Universität Hamburg in May 15–18, 2013. As the title 
suggests, the conference aimed at discussing and identifying regional 
and periodical characteristics of various manuscript and xylograph 
traditions within the Tibetan cultural sphere. The present volume 
contains twelve of the papers presented at the conference along with 
an introductory essay, which all together cover many of the above
mentioned issues regarding Tibetan manuscripts, xylographs, and 
legal handwritten documents, stemming from different periods of 
Tibetan history and from various regions within the Tibetan cultural 
sphere, including such that had been under its influence in the past. 
Although the volume is far from addressing neither all traditions of 
text and book cultures within the Tibetan cultural sphere nor all 
issues concerning them, it is hoped that it nonetheless will be a 
modest contribution to the advancement of research in this field 
along with several other recent publications with a similar or related 
focus. 

I would like to particularly thank Dorji Wangchuk for his 
cooperation and assistance in organising the conference and in 
making it possible through the financial support of the Khyentse 
Center for Tibetan Buddhist Textual Scholarship (KC-TBTS), and 
likewise for his support in various ways during the editing of the 
present volume. Special thanks are also due to the Khyentse 
Foundation whose financial support of the KC-TBTS enabled both 
the conference and the publication of the present volume. And last 
but not least thanks are also due to Eric Werner for his help in 
solving some last-minute technical problems during the preparation 
of the final version of the volume.
Orna Almogi
Hamburg, July 30, 2016

The rNying ma rgyud ’bum Set at the National Archives Kathmandu: The History of Its Production and Transmission Orna Almogi (Hamburg)[1]
 
1. Introductory Remarks

When I started my study on the history of the formation, production, 
and transmission of the rNying ma rgyud ’bum (the Collection of the 
Ancient Tantras), nine editions—eight manuscript and one 
xylograph—were accessible, for five of which there already exist 
catalogues of varying scope:
(1) The mTshams brag illuminated manuscript edition (Tb), 
with an online catalogue compiled by the Tibetan & 
Himalayan Library (THL),
(2) The Rig ’dzin Tshe dbang nor bu illuminated manuscript 
edition (Tn), also known as the Waddell edition, with a 
detailed online catalogue compiled by Cathy Cantwell, 
Robert Mayer, and Michael Fisher,
(3) The gTing skyes plain manuscript edition (Tk), with a 
catalogue compiled by Eiichi Kaneko (1982) and an online
catalogue compiled by the THL, 
(4) The Nubri illuminated manuscript edition (Nu), 
uncatalogued,
(5) The illuminated manuscript edition (Na) stored at the 
National Archives Kathmandu (NAK), uncatalogued,
(6) The sGang steng plain manuscript edition (Gt-p), 
uncatalogued,
(7) The sGang steng illuminated manuscript edition (G-i), with 
a catalogue compiled by Cathy Cantwell, Robert Mayer, 
Michael Kowalewky, and Jean-Luc Achard,
(8) dGra med rtse plain manuscript edition (Gm),
uncatalogued,3
(9) sDe dge xylograph edition (Dg), with a catalogue complied 
by Jean-Luc Achard (2003) and an online catalogue 
compiled by the THL.

Right from the outset of my study of the history of the 
transmission of the collection, it was clear that a thorough 
examination of the content of the Nubri and the NAK sets—which 
were microfilmed by the Nepal-German Manuscript Preservation

Project (NGMPP)4—would be necessary, not only for gaining an 
accurate picture of the history of their formation, production, and 
transmission, but also for better understanding the history of the 
rNying ma rgyud ’bum in general, and the place these two sets 
occupy within the collection’s various groups of transmission in 
particular.5 For this purpose, the Nubri and NAK sets stood at the 
centre of my initial investigation of the collection. In the following, I 
shall present some of the main findings regarding these two editions, 
primarily focusing, however, on the NAK set and only by extension 
on the Nubri one.


2. The Tibetan-Nepalese Borderlands rNying ma rgyud ’bum Editions: General Remarks

My study of these two sets—which, for reasons that will be made 
clear below, I collectively designate the “Tibetan-Nepalese 
Borderlands group”—has initially focused on their content and its 
arrangement, primarily following historical-philological and 
bibliographical methods. Some of the questions that arose in the 
course of the investigation were later on further addressed by 
employing various scientific methods, including material analysis 
(mainly of the inks and pigments, but to a lesser extent also of the 
paper) and multispectral imaging of the NAK set. [6]

Both the NAK and Nubri sets have been previously studied by 
Franz-Karl Ehrhard. As early as 1979, Ehrhard recorded seven 
volumes of a rNying ma rgyud ’bum set in his catalogue of the NAK 
collection of Tibetan texts that had been microfilmed thus far by the 
NGMPP (i.e. on the basis of the microfilms). [7] But it was not until 
1989, after gaining access to the NAK Tibetan collection itself, that
the entire Tibetan holdings, including the rNying ma rgyud ’bum set 
stored there, could be microfilmed. During the microfilming, it 
became clear that the set is incomplete. The team determined, most 
probably correctly, that the original number of volumes of the set 
was 37, but at the time it was believed that only 32 of them had 
survived and were in the safekeeping of the Archives. [8]

In 1992, this time during an expedition to Nubri (Samagaon), the NGMPP 
microfilmed a second rNying ma rgyud ’bum set. The Nubri set was 
complete, consisting of 37 volumes, and it soon became clear that the 
Nubri and the NAK sets are closely related to each other in terms of 
contents, organisation, and the history of their transmission. Ehrhard 
studied the two collections, paying particular attention to the second 
of the two dkar chag-s that were microfilmed together with the Nubri 
set, and published his findings in a 1997 article.[9]
 
In regard to the Nubri set, Ehrhard showed that several editions 
were produced at the behest of Brag dkar rta so sprul sku Chos kyi 
dbang phyug (1775–1837) at the end of the 18th and beginning of the 
19th centuries, one of them during the years 1813–1814. This latter 
set was reportedly prepared on the basis of a set from Glang ’phrang, 
which could be borrowed thank to one sKal bzang of the rDo dmar 
family. Ehrhard notes that the set was later kept in Brag dkar rta so 
and is today in the hands of Slob dpon ’Gyur med, who enabled the 
NGMPP to microfilm it. In regard to the edition stored at the NAK, 
Ehrhard suggested—on account of its similarity to the Nubri set and 
the fact that some of the volumes bore the seal of the Śrī Tīn 
Mahārāja Bhim Shumser Jang Bahadur Rana, who was the prime 
minister of Nepal from 1929 to 1932—that it is possibly the set 
reported to have been produced shortly after the Nubri set by a 
disciple of Brag dkar rta so sprul sku, one O rgyan ’phrin las bstan 
’dzin, who belonged to the Nyang clan of gZhung in Rong shar (i.e. 
the family responsible for the founding and upkeep of the main 
temple of Junbesi in Solu Khumbu), and to have later been given to 
Prime Minister Bhim Shumser. He further suggests that Sangs rgyas 
Bla ma (1856–1939) of the Nyang clan, who was under the 
protection of the Raṇa family and who was the person behind the 
renovation of the gZhung temple in Junbesi in 1914, was involved in
the gifting of the set to Bhim Shumsher. In regard to the content of 
these two editions, one of the interesting discoveries by Ehrhard at 
that time was the fact that the last two volumes of both sets contain 
rDzogs chen tantras that are not included in the gTing skyes edition, 
but are found in the Bai ro rgyud ’bum. 

My first step in the investigation of the two sets in question was to 
edit the dkar chag containing the bibliographical list that was 
microfilmed by the NGMPP together with the Nubri set (i.e. dKar 
chag 1). In addition, I located the titles mentioned there in the Nubri 
set itself and compared the Nubri and the NAK sets in terms of their 
contents and organisation. Moreover, I also attempted to identify the 
individual texts contained in these two sets with those found in the 
other known editions. Very soon, several things became clear: [10]

(a) Despite the great similarity between the Nubri and NAK 
sets, they differ in enough ways to presuppose a slightly 
different history of transmission.

(b) While the Nubri edition is more or less uniform in terms of 
its organisation, format, and layout, the NAK set is rather 
chaotic in these points, betraying rather poor editorial skills, 
and perhaps also a lack of familiarity with the literary 
material, on the part of its producers and editors. 

(c) The texts found in the last two volumes noted by Ehrhard as 
missing from the gTing skyes edition are all found in the 
editions belonging to the Central Bhutanese group.[11]
 
(d) Both sets contain texts that could not be located thus far in 
any of the other accessible rNying ma rgyud ’bum editions 
that are catalogued. 

(e) The NAK set apparently suffered from the moment it was 
conceived from a very ill thought-out organisational 
concept, which is particularly evident in the assignment of 
the volume numbers and the foliation. The fact that the set 
was in Nepalese possession seems to have contributed to the 
disorder, for the librarians in charge could seemingly not 
read Tibetan (though there was an attempt to insert folio 
numbers in Indian numerals on the verso of folios, 
apparently in order to facilitate the handling of the set by 
staff with no knowledge of Tibetan). These circumstances 
are perhaps the reason, too, why during the microfilming by 
the NGMPP only 32 volumes could be identified, although 
35 were present and were in fact microfilmed.

(f) And most importantly, the two sets clearly differ from the 
gTing skyes and the Rig ’dzin Tshe dbang nor bu editions in 
various ways, and therefore the four editions cannot be 
classified into one and the same group called “south-central,”
as previously suggested by Robert Mayer and Cathy Cantwell.[12]

3. The Six Groups of Transmission of the rNying ma rgyud ’bum

In connection with this last point, I would like to briefly present now 
an overview of the currently accessible rNying ma rgyud ’bum sets 
by way of grouping them in terms of the history of their 
transmission. During the past years, four further sets have become 
accessible. Two sets were digitised in Bhutan in 2012 within the 
framework of the above-mentioned project “Doxographical 
Organisational Schemes in Manuscripts and Xylographs of the 

Collection of the Ancient Tantras”:13 (1) a unique set from gDong 
dkar la monastery (Dk), Paro (sPa gro) district, and (2) an 
illuminated set from sPa sgar monastery (Pg), Thimphu (Thim 
phu/phug) district.14 Two further sets were digitised in 2013: (3) 
another unique set located in Khams (Kh), the digital images of 
which were obtained by me in the fall of 2013 from mKhan po ’Jam 
blo from the ’Jam dbyangs shes rig dar spel khang in Chengdu, and 
(4) an illuminated set from Sangs rgyas gling monastery 
(Sg), Tawang (rTa dbang), which was digitised by an Oxford 
University project under Cathy Cantwell, Robert Mayer, and 
Ngawang Tsepag. While the discoveries of the sPa sgar and Sangs 
rgyas gling editions have little significance in terms of advancing our 
understanding of the history of the transmission of the rNying ma 
rgyud ’bum collection, that of the gDong dkar la edition has great 
significance in this regard, since it represents a unique, hitherto 
unknown line of transmission. As for the Khams edition, although its 
content and organisation appears to be different from all other 
accessible editions, it is still unclear how significant it is as far as the 
collection’s history of transmission is concerned, and the matter is 
yet to be thoroughly investigated. The structure and content of these 
two editions cannot, however, be discussed here and will be treated 
separately elsewhere. On the basis of my extensive studies of the 
Nubri and NAK sets and my preliminary investigations of the gDong 
dkar la and Khams editions (catalogues of all four sets are currently 
under preparation),15 I suggest the following grouping of the 
thirteen16 editions accessible to date:17

(a) The Central Bhutanese group comprises six sets, all of 
which consist of 46 volumes and obviously ultimately go back 
to the same origin: (i) sGang steng plain manuscript edition 
(Gt-p), (ii) sGang steng illustrated manuscript edition (Gt-i), 

(iii) mTshams brag illustrated manuscript edition (Tb), (iv) 
dGra med rtse plain manuscript edition (Gm), (v) sPa sgar 
illustrated manuscript edition (Pg), and (vi) Sangs rgyas gling 
illustrated manuscript edition (Sg), which is unfortunately 
incomplete (vols. 11, 12 and 41 being missing). The relation of 
these six editions among themselves has not been thus far 
satisfactorily clarified. It is, however, quite certain that the 
sGang steng sets are among the earliest ones and that they (or 
one of them) have played an important role in the history of the 
transmission of the other editions in this group. From the 
information obtained thus far it seems that the earliest among 
them is the plain sGang steng set, which, according to 
historical sources, was produced in 1642 by Pad gling gsung 
sprul III Phan pa bzang po alias Kun mkhyen Tshul khrims rdo 
rje (1598–1669; TBRC: P1692) as a commemoration set 
(dgongs rdzogs) for his teacher sGang steng sprul sku I rGyal 
sras Padma ’phrin las (1565–1642; TBRC: P2659) right after 
his death.18 According to his autobiography, Pad gling gsung 
sprul III commissioned various objects to commemorate the 
death of sGang steng sprul sku I, the most important of which 
was a complete 46-volume rNying ma rgyud ’bum set. The 
scribes and other craftsmen are stated there to have been 
brought from distant places and the work to have been brought
to completion with much care.19 The set that served as the 
master copy for this edition is stated in Karma bde legs’s
rGyud ’bum dkar chag as having been borrowed from lHa 
lung, and the production as having taken about four months 
and as having required about 40 scribes (at least some of whom 
appear to have been from sNye mo).20 No information 
regarding the circumstances of the production of the master 
copy (reportedly from lHa lung)—which is clearly older than 
all accessible sets of the Central Bhutanese group, and possibly 
the one to which all ultimately goes back—could be obtained 
thus far. The sGang steng illuminated set is said to have been 
produced in 1726/27 as a commemoration set for sGang steng 
sprul sku II bsTan ’dzin legs pa’i don grub (1645–172621;
TBRC: P514). It has been further stated that the set was 
prepared under the auspices of the rGyal tshab—to be 
identified as Mi pham dbang po (1709–1738; TBRC: P531), 
the reincarnation of rGyal sras bsTan ’dzin rab rgyas (1638–
1698; TBRC: P512)—who also consecrated the set, that its 
front pages were written in gold on black paper, and that it 
consisted of “about 45!” volumes.22
 
The mTshams brag set is reported to have been commissioned
by mTshams brag sprul sku I Ngag dbang ’brug pa (1682–
1748; TBRC: P526), the founder of mTshams brag monastery 
and a disciple of sGang steng sprul sku II bsTan ’dzin legs pa’i 
don grub (1645–1726; TBRC: P514). His biography, composed 
by rJe mkhan po IX Shākya rin chen (1710–1759; TBRC: 
P530), mentions his commissioning of the edition only 
briefly.23 There the origin of the master copy is stated to be 
Punakha. This, however, is something that needs further 
verification, since sGang steng monastery, which has thus far 
been widely believed to be the source of the master copy, is 
located in Wangdue Phodrang (dBang ’dus pho brang) district 
and not in Punakha. The date of production is not provided 
either but it has most probably begun in 172624 and been 
completed in 1728.25 These dates as the years of production of 
this set make one wonder what the exact connection between it 
and the one commissioned by rGyal tshab Mi pham dbang po 
and others at around the same time to commemorate sGang 
steng sprul sku II. One askes oneself, for example, whether 
mTshams brag sprul sku, too, conceived the set as 
commemoration to sGang steng sprul sku II (who was his own 
teacher), whether the same set served as the master copy, and 
whether there was any logistical coordination between the two 
projects (e.g. sharing the same scribes and editors). 
The production date of the Sangs rgyas gling edition26 is 
unclear but, provided it is a copy of the mTshams brag set, it
would be later than the latter. The production dates of the dGra 
med rtse and sPa sgar sets have not yet been determined. This 
leaves us with the sGang steng plain edition produced in 1642, 
the sGang steng illuminated edition of 1726/27, and the 
mTshams brag edition probably dating from 1726–1728, that 
is, from around the same time as the sGang steng illustrated 
set, while the relationship among the Gt-p, Gt-i, and Tb sets is 
not completely clear. 

(b) The South-Western Tibetan group comprises two sets, both 
apparently of 33 volumes originally: (i) Rig ’dzin Tshe dbang 
nor bu illuminated manuscript edition (Tn) (incomplete), and 

(ii) gTing skyes dGon pa byang plain manuscript edition (Tk). 
The two sets represent the fruit of activity surrounding the 
production and transmission of the rNying ma rgyud ’bum in 
South-Western Tibet during the late 18th century and perhaps 
also at the beginning of the 19th century. As for the Rig ’dzin 
Tshe dbang nor bu set, as shown by Cantwell and Mayer, it 
was commissioned in honour of Kaḥ thog rig ’dzin Tshe dbang 
nor bu (1698–1755), perhaps by actual students of his or later 
followers of his tradition, and thus can likely be dated to the 
late 18th century.27 As already pointed out by Dan Martin, the 
gTing skyes set is probably the set reported in the biographies 
of the gTing skyes dGong pa byang throne-holders composed 
by mTha’ grol rdo rje. There it is listed among the numerous 
books that the founder of dGon pa byang (TBRC: G1KR1628),
Padma chos ’phel (alias Bya btang mKhas grub lha rje alias 
Tshe ring don ’grub, 1772/1773–1836; cf. TBRC: 
P2DB20793), deposited in the monastery’s temple.28 The year 
of the monastery’s founding, and thus a terminus post quem of
the set’s production, is unknown, but considering the dates of
Padma chos ’phel, it would be reasonable to assume that he 
carried out activities of such monumental scale during the 
second half of his life and thus place the set’s production in the 
early decades of the 19th century. This would position it slightly 
later than the Rig ’dzin Tshe dbang nor bu set. The relation 
between the two sets is, however, yet to be determined. 

(c) The Tibetan-Nepalese Borderlands group also consists of 
two sets, apparently both originally in 37 volumes: (i) the 
Nubri set (Nu), an illuminated manuscript edition that was 
produced in Brag dkar rta so and is currently stored in Nubri, 
and (ii) the NAK set (Na), an illuminated manuscript edition 
probably produced in the Solu Khumbu area and is currently 
stored at the National Archives in Kathmandu (incomplete). As 
pointed out earlier, both were produced at the beginning of the 
19th century: the Nubri set was produced in Brag dkar rta so at 
the behest of Brag dkar rta so sprul sku Chos kyi dbang phyug 
during the years 1813–1814, and the NAK set probably in the 
Solu Khumbu area shortly after the Nubri set at the behest of 
one O rgyan ’phrin las bstan ’dzin, a disciple of Brag dkar rta 
so sprul sku. As I shall show below, although the NAK set is 
probably later than the Nubri one, it reflects an earlier (i.e. 
older) stage in the history of the transmission than the Nubri 
set, as is clearly evident from its organisation.

(d) The Western Bhutanese group, consisting thus far of one 
set, namely, the gDong dkar la plain manuscript edition (Dk). 
As I have shown elsewhere, the set was probably produced in 
1647 in East Bhutan, at the behest of sPa gro Chos dbang lhun 
grub (b. 17th cent.; TBRC: P2718) and under the sponsorship of 
King Dewa of Kha ling, his queen and other residents of the 
area.29 This set comprises 28 volumes, and from a preliminary 
study of it, it has become clear that it differs greatly from all 
other sets accessible thus far and indeed represents an 
independent compilation. There is no doubt that it is
independent of the Central Bhutanese group, which came into 
being around the centre of the Pad gling tradition in lHa lung. 
To be noted is that the earliest available set amongst the 
Central Bhutanese group (i.e. the plain sGang steng) was 
produced only a few years prior to the gDong dkar la edition. 
There is therefore no doubt that a thorough study of it will shed 
more light on the history of the rNying ma rgyud ’bum
collection in general and its transmission in Bhutan in 
particular. An interesting feature of this set is that it is rich in 
editorial glosses, which give numerous hints regarding the 
process of its compilation and the policies followed by its 
editors (see fig. 2). These glosses are valuable not only for our 
better understanding of the collection’s history of transmission 
but also for our better understanding of the text and book 
cultures in Tibet in general, for they provide us with unique 
glimpses into the compilatory and editorial processes shaping 
large corpora of Buddhist literary collections (be they 
canonical, para-canonical, or extra-canonical)—processes that 
have been practised within the Tibetan cultural sphere for 
centuries.30

(e) The fifth group, which will be tentatively called (Central 
Bhutanese)–Eastern Tibetan,31 likewise consists thus far of 
only one set of 34 volumes, which are written in dBu med in 
black ink with rubrication in red (see fig. 3). For lack of 
sufficient details regarding its exact origin, it is simply referred 
to here as the Khams edition (Kh). As stated above, I obtained 
digital images of this set from mKhan po ’Jam blo (of the ’Jam 
dbyangs shes rig dar spel khang) during a visit to Chengdu in 
the fall of 2013. This set of images consists of 34 folders,
numbered 1–34. To be noted, however, that the 34th folder 
contains images of an as yet unidentified modern reproduction 
of a dBu med manuscript (bearing page numbers in printed 
Arabic numerals), which obviously differs from the first 33 
volumes in both codicological and palaeographical terms. The 
set—which is currently stored in gZhi chen monastery,32 a 
subsidiary of Kaḥ thog monastery in the Serta area—is, like the 
gDong dkar la set, unique in terms of content and organisation. 
My preliminary study of this Khams edition shows that, while 
it too bears witness to independent compilatory work on the 
part of its producers, its compilers had access to a set related to 
the Central-Bhutanese group. It seems that, just as in the case 
of the Tibetan-Nepalese Borderlands group, this edition 
represents a transitional or intermediate stage between the 
South-Western Tibetan and the Central Bhutanese groups. 
However, since it includes not only texts found in the editions 
of both the Tibetan-Nepalese Borderlands and Central 
Bhutanese groups, but also texts that are only found in the 
Central Bhutanese group, it clearly represents a stage in the 
transmission that is later than the one reflected by the Tibetan-
Nepalese Borderlands group. Moreover, its organisation does 
not resemble any of the other groups, so that its exact relation 
to them is yet to be determined. It appears, however, to 
resemble more the Central Bhutanese group in terms of content 
(if not in terms of organisation). Thus the suggestion to
tentatively name the group it represents (Central Bhutanese)–
Eastern Tibetan. According to personal communication with 
Karma bde legs (previously of dPal brtseg, Lhasa), this edition 
was apparently compiled at the behest of Khyab gdal lhun grub 
(b. 17th cent.) from Brag dmar monastery33 (the current 
digitisation efforts in gZhi chen were carried out by mKhan po 
’Chi med rig ’dzin from Bla rung sgar, likewise in the Serta 
area). The exact time and place of compilation and production, 
the master copies used, the persons involved, and the exact role 
of Brag dmar Khyab gdal lhun grub are, however, as yet to be 
clarified. If this edition indeed dates from the late 17th or early 
18th century (provided it was indeed commissioned by Brag 
dmar Khyab gdal lhun grub), the circumstances of its 
production, if they come to light, are surely bound to shed light 
on the collection’s history of transmission in East Tibet, of 
which little is known thus far.34

(f) The (Central)–Eastern Tibetan group consists of the only 
xylographic edition of the collection that has ever been 
produced. Despite the fact that this group is represented by 
only a single set from East Tibet, it seems more accurate to 
designate it “(Central)–Eastern Tibetan” and not simply 
“Eastern Tibetan,” since, as is well known, it was prepared at 
the behest of the queen of sDe dge Tshe dbang lha mo—the 
wife of the sDe dge king Sa dbang bzang po, who died at the 
early age of 25 years—between the years 1794 and 1798. It is 
said to be based on several sets, but the master copy was 
obviously the Central Tibetan set (or a copy of it) 
commissioned by ’Jigs med gling pa (1729/30–1798; TBRC: 
P3) in Padma ’od gling some years earlier.35 A comparison of 
its contents with ’Jigs med gling pa’s title list of the Padma ’od 
gling set contained in his history-cum-catalogue of the rNying 
ma rgyud ’bum shows that the two are indeed very similar, 
though not identical.36

4. The NAK Set, Its Production, Organisation, and History of Transmission

In the following I wish to return to the two Tibetan-Nepalese 
Borderlands editions, with an emphasis on the NAK set. On the basis 
of my comparison of the content of these two sets, the following 
conclusions could be drawn thus far:
(a) Due to the fact that, unlike the Nubri set, the NAK set 
suffers from great deficiencies in regard to the organisation of 
its individual texts, volumes numbers, and foliation it clearly 
represents an earlier stage than the Nubri set in terms of the 
overall history of the transmission of the rNying ma rgyud 
’bum in the Tibetan-Nepalese Borderlands. (This of course 
does not mean that the former was produced earlier than the 
latter!) Thus, the Nubri set could not have possibly served as 
the master copy for the NAK set—as one is tempted to believe 
based on the assumption that the latter was very probably 
produced after the former and the reported master–disciple 
relationship between Brag dkar rta so sprul sku, who was 
behind the production of the Nubri set, and O rgyan ’phrin las
bstan ’dzin from Rong shar, who, it has been suggested, was 
the figure behind the production of the NAK set.
(b) The Tibetan-Nepalese Borderlands group—of presumably 
originally 37 volumes in each of its sets—clearly represents an 
intermediate stage between the South-Western Tibetan 
group—consisting of the gTing skyes and Tshe dbang nor bu 
editions, presumably originally 33 volumes each—and the 
Central Bhutanese group—consisting of six sets of 46 volumes 
each. As Ehrhard already pointed out, dkar chag 2, which was 
transmitted together with the Nubri set, informs us that when 
Myang ston mnga’ bdag Rig ’dzin rgya mtsho (b. 17th cent.), a 
disciple of gTer bdag gling pa (1646–1714; TBRC: P7), was 
acting as the chief editor of the sNar thang xylograph edition of 
the bKa’ ’gyur prepared at Shel dkar at the behest of the ruler 
Pho lha ba/nas bSod nams stobs rgyas (1689–1747; TBRC: 
P346)—that is, sometime between 1730 and 1732—he asked 
the ruler to invite a master named Ngag dbang lhun grub grags 
pa from lHo brag lHa lung to participate in the endeavour. 
Consequently, Ngag dbang lhun grub grags pa came to dPal 
mo chos sding in La stod (TBRC: G1KR1648), a monastery 
founded by Bo dong ’Jigs med grags pa alias Phyogs las rnam 
rgyal (1376–1451; TBRC: P2627), and gave there teachings—
including a text transmission of the rNying ma rgyud ’bum!—to 
various personalities of the area. It is further reported that after 
the teaching and reading transmission, Ngag dbang lhun grub 
grags pa called upon the disciples to make a copy of the entire 
collection of the rNying ma rgyud ’bum in order to increase the 
reading transmission and to likewise carry out a reading 
transmission of the collection at least once. As a result, several 
sets were produced. Considering this report, it is very plausible 
that the text transmission of the rNying ma rgyud ’bum given 
by Ngag dbang lhun grub grags pa was based on a copy of a 
collection that he brought with him from lHo brag lHa lung, 
which, as we know, was the centre of the Pad gling 
reincarnation lineages and the location where the prototype for 
the Central Bhutanese editions very probably originated.37 In 
this case, it is also very likely that this lHa lung set served as 
the master copy for the Tibetan-Nepalese borderlands editions. 
This would suggest that the texts contained in the last two
volumes of these two editions and other texts that are not found 
in the editions of the South-Western Tibetan group but in those 
of the Central-Bhutanese one were already included in the lHa 
lung edition, and maybe were even added to the rNying ma 
rgyud ’bum there for the first time. However, we have no exact 
information as to its predecessor, or in other words, to the 
prototype I assume to have served as the master copy for the 
Tibetan-Nepalese Borderlands editions, and which I suggest 
represents an intermediate, or transitional, stage in the history 
of the transmission of the collection, reflecting its state at a 
particular point on the line of transmission between the South-Western Tibetan group, on the one hand, and the Central 
Bhutanese group, on the other. To be kept in mind is that if the 
master copy of the Tibetan-Nepalese Borderlands editions was 
indeed a copy brought by Ngag dbang lhun grub grags pa from 
lHo brag lHa lung in 1730, it would appear that Ngag dbang 
lhun grub grags pa brought along with him a copy representing 
an earlier stage of the 46-volume Central Bhutanese group 
despite the fact that several copies of the 46-volume edition 
have already existed (i.e. at least the sGang steng plain edition 
of 1642, sGang steng illuminated edition of 1726/27, mTshams 
brag edition of probably 1726–1728, and the one reported to 
have been prepared by Pad gling gsung sprul IV Ngag dbang 
kun bzang rdo rje in the 1710s or early 1720s). The reasons for 
Ngag dbang lhun grub grags pa’s choice of the master copy 
could have been very practical ones, such as availability (we 
still do not have any explicit information regarding the 
existence of the 46-volume edition in lHa lung itself), but also 
other matters could have played a role, such as the tradition he 
belonged to and the lineage of reading transmission he 
received.
As I pointed out earlier, the NAK set is incomplete and suffers from 
major organisational deficiencies, a fact that initially led to 
difficulties in identifying and determining the number of available 
volumes. During my cataloguing of the NAK set—which also 
included a comparison with the Nubri set—it became clear that 35 of 
what were probably originally 37 (Ka−Ji) volumes are currently 
stored in the National Archives, with only volumes Za and Sha being 
missing. Most of the organisational deficiencies seem to have had 
their origin already at the time the set was being produced. They 
mainly take the form of the wrong assignment of volume numbers—
which in turn led to some confusion in the way the individual 
volumes were stored in the National Archives. While the originally 
37 volumes of the NAK set should have been, exactly as in the case 
of the Nubri set, assigned the numbers Ka–Ji, what we find is that in 
several cases certain volume numbers have been assigned twice, and 
in two other cases volume numbers have probably not been assigned 
at all:
(a) Two volumes are assigned the number Ja. During the 
cataloguing it became clear that one of them, designated by me 
Ja2, should be in fact volume Zha, which at first seems to be 
missing. This volume is, however, unfortunately incomplete, 
the first 81 folios being missing. As I have shown elsewhere, 
there seem to be no particular features common to volumes Ja 
and Ja2 (= Zha) which could possibly explain this confusion: 
the hands are different and no shared pattern of the 
employment of the ink varieties could be observed. It could, 
however, be demonstrated that the ink varieties used in Ja2 (= 
Zha) are rather similar to those used in some of the last 
volumes of the collection, which are generally of poorer 
quality—that is, in terms of the performance of the scribes and 
artist, the materials used, and the editorial scrutiny—and which 
appear to have been possibly produced towards the end of the 
project, perhaps by a different group of scribes in the same or a 
different location, and very probably also under some financial 
strain. This fact may not fully explain the reason for the 
confusion in the assignment of the volume number, but perhaps 
it partly does.38
(b) In addition to one volume numbered Tha, which 
corresponds to its counterpart in the Nubri set and thus can be 
assumed to be bearing the correct volume number, we find 
another small volume that is likewise assigned the number Tha. 
This volume, which I have designated Tha2, merely consists of 
133 folios and only contains one text. This text corresponds to 
the third text in volume Da in the Nubri set and is indeed 
missing from volume Da in the NAK set.39 Also to be noted is
the fact that unlike in the case of the other volumes, the first 
two folios of Tha2 are not illuminated. Unfortunately, no 
evidence could be found thus far—either through 
palaeographical examination or by means of material analysis 
of the types of ink used—that could hint at the origin of Tha2 
and explain its existence or coming into being.40
(c) We also find two volumes with the number Ma. The 
volume I designate Ma2 is incomplete, missing the first 191 
folios. As I have pointed out elsewhere, it had been initially 
assigned the volume number Pha, but the number was later on 
altered to Ma. The reasons for this change have thus far not 
been clarified, neither through historical-philological inquiry 
nor by way of material analysis or multispectral imaging. 
Nonetheless, it could be established, through both 
palaeographical examination and material analysis of the ink—
that Ma2 was highly likely to have been an integral part of the 
collection from the time of its production and so is not of 
external origin. It should be, however, perhaps pointed out that 
most of the texts contained in Ma2 are found in volume Ma of 
the Rig ’dzin Tshe dbang nor bu edition, which could be a 
useful piece of evidence regarding the history of the 
transmission of this cluster of texts, provided more pieces of 
the puzzle surface in the future. Furthermore, all five texts 
contained therein (i.e. fols. 192–390) match the first five texts 
in volume Pha of the Nubri set.41 Interestingly, the counterparts 
of the remaining 15 texts in volume Pha of the Nubri edition 
(Nu.237–244) are found in volume Da in the NAK set (fols. 1–
164),42 while the counterparts of the texts contained in volume 
Pha of the NAK set are all found in volume Ba of the Nubri 
set.43 These differences between the Nubri and the NAK sets in 
the distribution of texts within the individual volumes should 
be weighed against the fact that in general there is otherwise a 
rather good correspondence between the two sets.
(d) At least two volumes seem not to have been initially 
assigned a number at all, namely, Wa and Ji. Moreover, as I 
have already pointed out elsewhere, both of these volumes 
seem to have been at some point erroneously assigned the 
number Tsa (while the latter has also been occasionally 
confused with the number Ca due to the graphical similarity of 
these two Tibetan letters), a mistake that was obviously soon 
recognised by the persons involved in the production. The 
reason that these volumes initially lacked a number and that 
they were then falsely assigned the same number (in both cases 
there may have been some graphical confusion) has 
unfortunately not been satisfactorily clarified thus far.44
 
Besides these obvious irregularities and confusion regarding the 
assignment of volume numbers, one often also observes confusion 
regarding the assignment of folio numbers in the NAK set. Several of 
these cases have been examined by way of multispectral imaging. As 
has already pointed out, the processed images seem to support the 
historical-philological and palaeographical-codicological analyses 
which suggest that the work load appeared to have been distributed 
among the scribes in bundles of ten folios and that at least in some 
cases the confusion in the foliation is probably a result of this 
division of labour (possibly when not properly supervised and 
coordinated).45
 
Despite the evidently poor editorial quality, the production of the 
NAK set must have been regarded as a prestigious project, as is 
commonly the case with the production of such huge corpora. The 
fact that the first two written pages (i.e. fols. 1b & 2a) of most of the 
volumes in the set are illuminated—the text being written with 
golden ink on black paper and decorated with illustrations—further 
confirm the prestigious nature of this undertaking. Nonetheless, the 
quality of the illuminated pages varies greatly, including (i) the 
quality of the gold (which turned out to be in most cases a mixture of 
gold and orpiment in varying ratios, while only in some cases was the 
ink found to be made of pure gold, and in some others it consisted of 
orpiment alone with no gold component at all), (ii) the usage of red 
ink instead of golden ink (particularly in the last volumes),46 (iii) the 
quality of the illustrations (some of which were, for example, left 
unpainted or only partly painted), (iv) the quality of other decorative 
elements, such as the curtained windows of the verso of the first 
folios (some windows, for example, were left uncut), and (v) 
inconsistency in the layout. Some examples of the varying quality of 
the illuminated front pages of the NAK set—of, in particular, their 
declining quality in terms of both material and artistry—as well as 
variation in their layout are provided below (see figs. 4–8).47 As I 
have suggested elsewhere, the inconsistency in the quality of the gold 
and the illustrations—which seem to be declining particularly in the 
last volumes—appears to hint at financial difficulties towards the end 
of the production project.

To sum up, as we have seen, the organisational incoherency and 
fluctuating quality of the craftsmen’s skill and style and of the 
writing material used could be partly explained on the basis of the 
observations and findings made thus far, and several plausible 
assumptions could be accordingly articulated: (i) At least some of the 
volumes of the NAK set were produced by a different team of 
scribes, possibly at a different location. (ii) Different artists, likewise 
possibly in different locations, were responsible for the illustrations. 
(iii) The sponsors of this huge undertaking very probably faced 
financial difficulties, particularly towards its end phase. (iv) The 
division of labour among the scribes possibly involved the 
distribution of bundles consisting of ten folios each. (v) The editorial 
proofreading was in all likelihood carried out in a centralised 
manner.

5. Concluding Remarks 

In this paper, I have touched upon and discussed several issues 
regarding the history of the transmission of the rNying ma rgyud 
’bum in general and that of the NAK set in particular. I first pointed 
out the existence of a hitherto unrecognised distinct group among the 
currently accessible rNying ma rgyud ’bum sets, one that reflects a 
separate line of transmission, namely, the Tibetan-Nepalese 
Borderlands group, consisting of the Nubri and NAK sets, which thus 
far have been grouped together with the Rig ’dzin Tshe dbang nor bu 
and the gTing skyes sets (under the designation “south-central”). 
Secondly, I have presented a scheme of six groups, presenting six 
distinct lines of the transmission of the rNying ma rgyud ’bum
collection, with an attempt to briefly discuss the dates and the

circumstances of their production, so as to enable us to better 
understand the relation between the sets within one and the same 
group on the one hand and between the groups on the other. This was 
followed by a brief discussion of the historical background of the
Nubri and NAK sets and of their content in comparison to other sets, 
on the basis of which I suggested that the Tibetan-Nepalese 
Borderlands group represents an intermediate or transitional stage 
between the South-Western Tibetan and the Central Bhutanese 
groups. Lastly, I discussed some distinct features of the NAK set, 
particularly in comparison to the Nubri set, focusing on selected 
irregularities in the NAK set. On the basis of this examination I 
proposed that the NAK set represents a stage in the transmission line 
of the collection in the Tibetan-Nepalese Borderlands that is earlier 
than that of the Nubri set, even though the NAK set was probably 
produced later than the Nubri one. However, all the circumstances 
surrounding the production of the NAK set have yet to be uncovered. 
Considering all the irregularities that slipped through the editorial 
oversight—as reflected in organisational matters, such as text order, 
assignment of volume numbers, and foliation—and the fluctuating 
quality of the material and its visual impact—as reflected in writing 
materials, the skills and style of the craftsmen (scribes and artists), 
and layout—several questions arise regarding the production of the 
NAK set. These include (i) whether the organisational deficiencies 
reflect the state of the master copy; (ii) whether there was no capable 
scholar available; (iii) whether the set was produced in haste; (iv) 
whether its production was partially outsourced or staggered—that is, 
it was produced in different places or at different points in time; (v) 
what led to the logistical or financial difficulties that the production 
process seems to have faced; and (vi) whether all the volumes 
currently stored at the National Archives have been an integral part 
of the collection from the very beginning or whether some are later 
additions. While some of these questions will have to remain 
unanswered as long as no further evidence comes to light, attempts 
have been made to answer some of them, at least partially, by 
combining historical-philological studies with codicological-cum-
palaeographical investigations and scientific examinations (including 
analyses of the ink and paper and multispectral imaging). The present 
article augments my two recent publications concerning the NAK set, 
which have mainly presented the research results of codicological-
cum-palaeographical studies combined with scientific methods—
including material analysis of the ink and paper and multispectral 
imaging of select folios from the NAK set—conducted in an attempt 
to answer some of the questions that have ensued as a result of 
observations made during my historical-philological (i.e. particularly 
bibliographical) studies of the Nubri and NAK sets. It particularly 
discusses findings resulting from historical-philological studies—of 
mainly bibliographical, biographical, and historical material of 
various sorts—in an attempt to shed more light on the history of the 
production and transmission of the rNying ma rgyud ’bum collection 
in the Tibetan-Nepalese borderlands in general and of the NAK set in 
particular.
Moreover, the findings gained through the study of the 
circumstances of the production of the NAK set go beyond their 
significance to the study of the history of the formation, production 
and transmission of the rNying ma rgyud ’bum collection. As I have 
shown in my recent discussion of the gDong dkar la edition,48 the 
study of the circumstances leading to the formation of a rNying ma 
rgyud ’bum set—and in fact of any other large corpus of Buddhist 
literature for that matter—could shed more light on the book and text 
cultures within the Tibetan cultural sphere in general, and on the 
compilatory process, editorial policies, scribal practices, and 
logistical matters in particular. This is in addition to the increasing 
knowledge obtained in recent years regarding the material aspects of 
the culture of the book within the Tibetan cultural domain, 
particularly concerning paper but also ink and pigments. 

Bibliography

1. Primary Sources

gTing skyes ’khrungs rabs rnam thar = mTha’ grol rdo rje. mTshungs 
med dpal mgon bla ma dam pa gting skyes dgon byang mchog 
sprul ’khrungs rabs bcu’i rnam par thar pa mdo tsam brjod pa. 
Biographies of successive embodiments of the Tingkye Gonpa 
Jang masters. Reproduced from a manuscript made in 1965 in 
Sikkim. Thimphu: Kunzang Tobgyel & Mani Dorji, 1979. 
[Scans: TBRC: W2CZ6602].

Gu bkra’i chos ’byung = Gu ru bkra shis alias sTag sgang mkhas 
mchog Ngag dbang blo gros, bsTan pa’i snying po gsang chen 
snga ’gyur nges don zab mo’i chos kyi byung ba gsal bar byed 
pa’i legs bshad mkhas pa dga’i byed ngo mtshar gtam gyi rol 
mtsho. Beijing: Krung go bod kyi shes rig dpe skrun khang, 
1990.

mTshams brag rnying rgyud dkar chag = Mi nyag Thub bstan chos 
dar. mTshams brag rnying ma rgyud ’bum gyi dkar chag gsal 
ba’i me long. Beijing: Mi rigs dpe skrun khang, 2009.
Ngag dbang ’brug pa’i rnam thar = rJe mkhan po IX Shākya rin 
chen. rGyal kun brtse ba’i spyi gzugs sems dpa' chen po gsung 
dbang sprin dbyangs kyi rtogs pa brjod pa rig ’dzin kun tu dga’ 
ba’i zlos gar. In Thub dbang gnyis pa rgyal ba shākya rin chen 
gyi gsung ’bum. Reproduced from the unique MS. Prepared 
after the author’s death and preserved at his monastery of Pha-jo-ldin Bya-rgod-phun-po. Thimphu: Kunzang Topgey, 
1976, vol. 2, pp. 487–585. [Scans: TBRC: W8684-4366]. 

rGyud ’bum dkar chag = Karma bde legs. sNga ’gyur rgyud ’bum rin 
po che phyogs sgrig gi dkar chag. Lhasa: dPal brtsegs bod yig 
dpe rnying zhib ’jug khang, 2009.
rNying ma rgyud ’bum Dg = sDe dge Xylograph Edition. 25+1 vols. 
Scans: TBRC: W21939. Catalogue: (i) Jean-Luc Achard, “Rig 

’dzin Tshe dbang mchog grub (1761–1829) et la constitution 
du rNying ma rgyud ’bum de sDe dge.” Revue d’Etudes 
Tibétaines 3: 43–89, 2003; (ii) The Tibetan & Himalayan 
Library (THL), www.thlib.org.

rNying ma rgyud ’bum Dk = gDong dkar la Plain Ms Edition. 28 
vols. Stored at gDong dkar la monastery, Paro district, Bhutan. 
Tibetan Manuscript and Xylograph Traditions
62
Digitisation: CSMC, Universität Hamburg & Preservation of 
Bhutan’s Written Heritage, Bhutan, 2012.

rNying ma rgyud ’bum Gm = dGra med rtse Plain Ms Edition. 46 
vols. Stored at dGra med rtse monastery, Mongar district, 
Bhutan. Digitisation: Karma Phuntsho in cooperation with The 
British Library, 2006.

rNying ma rgyud ’bum Gt-i = sGang steng Illuminated Ms Edition. 46 
vols. Stored at sGang steng monastery, Wangdue district, 
Bhutan. Digitisation: Karma Phuntsho in cooperation with The 
British Library, 2003. Catalogue: Cathy Cantwell, Rob Mayer, 
Michael Kowalewski & Jean-Luc Achard, The sGang steng-b 
rNying ma’i rGyud ’bum Manuscript from Bhutan. 
“Introduction” by Cantwell & Mayer, 4–15, “Catalogue” by 
Cantwell, Mayer, Kowalewski & Achard, 16–141. Revue 
d’Etudes Tibétaines 11, 2006.

rNying ma rgyud ’bum Gt-p = sGang steng Plain Ms Edition. 46 vols. 
Stored at sGang steng monastery, Wangdue district, Bhutan. 
Digitisation: Karma Phuntsho in cooperation with The British
Library, 2004.
rNying ma rgyud ’bum Kh = Khams Plain Ms Edition. 34 vols. 
Digitisation: mKhan po ’Chi med rig ’dzin, Bla rung sgar, 
2011?. [Partly = TBRC: W2PD17382, 39(!) vols.; scans 
currently restricted.]

rNying ma rgyud ’bum Na = National Archives Kathmandu 
Illuminated Ms Edition. 37? vols. (incomplete, 35 vol. 
available). Stored at the National Archives Kathmandu, Nepal 
(Ms no. 5). [The set is probably originally from Junbesi, Solu 
Khumbu, Nepal.] Microfilmed by the Nepal-German 
Manuscript Preservation Project (NGMPP), 1989: Reel Nos. 
AT 1/1–AT 25.

rNying ma rgyud ’bum Nu = Nubri Illuminated Ms Edition. 37 vols. 
In the possession of Slob dpon ’Gyur med, Nubri (Samagaon), 
Nepal. [The set is originally from Brag dkar rta so.] 
Microfilmed by the Nepal-German Manuscript Preservation 
Project (NGMPP), 1993: Reel Nos. L 426/4–L 448/1.

rNying ma rgyud ’bum Pg = sPa sgar Illuminated Ms Edition. 46 
vols. Was stored at sPa sgar monastery, Thimphu district, 
Bhutan. Digitisation: CSMC, Universität Hamburg & 
Orna Almogi: The rNying ma rgyud ’bum Set at the National Archives Kathmandu 63
Preservation of Bhutan’s Written Heritage, Bhutan, 2012. [Ms 
destroyed by fire on 29.02.2012.]

rNying ma rgyud ’bum Sg = Sangs rgyas gling Illuminated Ms 
Edition. 46 vols. (incomplete, 43 vols. available). Digitisation: 
Cathy Cantwell, Rob Mayer, Ngawang Tsepag, 2013. [Scans 
can be viewed in person at the Weston Library of the Bodleian, 
Oxford; announced as soon to be made available through the 
TBRC: W1KG16449].

rNying ma rgyud ’bum Tb = mTshams brag Illuminated Ms Edition. 
46 vols. Stored at mTshams brag monastery, Thimphu district, 
Bhutan. Facsimile Edition: Thimphu: The National Library of 
Bhutan, 1982. Scans: TBRC: W21521. Catalogue: The Tibetan 
& Himalayan Library (THL), www. thlib.org.

rNying ma rgyud ’bum Tk = gTing skyes Plain Ms Edition. 33 vols. 
Facsimile Edition: Thimphu: Dingo Khyentse Rimpoche, 
1973–1975. 33+3 vols. Scans: TBRC: W21598. Catalogues: (i) 
Eiichi Kaneko 1982. Ko Tanotora zenshū kaidai mokuroku [A 
catalogue of the Khyentse edition of the gTing-skyes dgon-pa-byang rnying-ma-rgyud-’bum]. Tokyo: Kokusho Kankūkai; (ii) 
The Tibetan & Himalayan Library (THL), www. thlib.org.
rNying ma rgyud ’bum Tn = Rig ’dzin Tshe dbang nor bu (=Waddell) 
Illuminated Ms Edition. 33? vols. (incomplete). Stored at 
various places, including The British Library, London; 
Bodleian Library, Oxford University; Victoria and Albert 
Museum, London. Catalogue: Cathy Cantwell, Robert Mayer 
& Michael Fisher, http://ngb.csac.anthropology.ac.uk/.

sDe dge rnying rgyud dkar chag = Mi nyag Thub bstan chos dar. 
rNying ma rgyud ’bum gyi dkar chag gsal ba’i me long. 
Beijing: Mi rigs dpe skrun khang, 2000.

sGang steng sprul sku gnyis pa’i rnam thar = rJe mkhan po X bsTan 
’dzin chos rgyal. sGang steng sprul sku bstan ’dzin legs pa’i 
don grub kyi rnam thar. Phuentsholing, Bhutan: KMT 
Publishers, [2009].

Tshul rdor rnam thar = Pad gling gsung sprul III Phan pa bzang po 
alias Kun mkhyen Tshul khrims rdo rje, sPrul sku tshul rdor 
gyi rnam par thar pa’i tshul sgrib med ston pa’i me long. Ms. 
[Scans: TBRC: W8LS15799].
Tibetan Manuscript and Xylograph Traditions 64

2. Secondary Sources

Achard, Jean-Luc. 2003 = See rNying ma rgyud ’bum Dg.
Almogi, Orna. 2015. “The Spa sgar and Gdong dkar la Rnying ma 
rgyud ’bum Editions: Two Newly Discovered Sets from 
Bhutan.” In Olaf Czaja & Guntram Hazod (eds.), The 
Illuminating Mirror. Tibetan Studies in Honour of Per K. 
Sørensen on the Occasion of his 65th Birthday. Wiesbaden: Dr. 
Ludwig Reichert Verlag, 1–14.
——. forthcoming-a. The Collection of the Ancient Tantras (rNying 
ma rgyud ’bum): The History of Its Formation, Production, and 
Transmission. Indian and Tibetan Studies Series. Hamburg: 
Department for Indian and Tibetan Studies, Universität 
Hamburg.
——. forthcoming-b. “Spiritual Masters and Master Copies on the 
Move: On Some Manuscript Editions of the rNying ma rgyud 
’bum from East Tibet and Their Origin.” 
Almogi, Orna, Emanuel Kindzorra, Oliver Hahn & Ira Rabin. 2015. 
“Inks, Pigments, Paper: In Quest of Unveiling the History of 
the Production of a Tibetan Buddhist Manuscript Collection 
from the Tibetan-Nepalese Borderlands.” JIABS 36/37, 
2013/2014 (2015): 93‒117.
Almogi, Orna, Martin Delhey, Claire MacDonald & Boryana 
Pouvkova. 2015. “Recovering Lost Text and Beyond: 
Multispectral Imaging for Text-related and Codicological 
Studies of Tibetan Paper and Sanskrit Palm-Leaf Manuscripts.”
Cantwell, Cathy. 2002. “Distinctive Features of the Edition.” 
http://ngb.csac.anthropology.ac.uk. [A revised version of 
“Distinctive Features of the Rig ’dzin tshe dbang nor bu 
(Waddell) Edition of the rNying ma’i rgyud ’bum.” In Helmut 
Eimer & David Germano (eds.), The Many Canons of Tibetan 
Buddhism. PIATS, Leiden 2000. Leiden: Brill, 2002: 359–
376.] 
Cantwell, Kathy & Robert Mayer. 2007. The Kīlaya Nirvāṇa Tantra 
and the Vajra Wrath Tantra: Two Texts from the Ancient 
Tantra Collection. Philosophisch-historische Klasse, 
Denkschriften 349. Beiträge zur Kultur- und Geistesgeschichte 
Orna Almogi: The rNying ma rgyud ’bum Set at the National Archives Kathmandu
65
Asiens 52. Vienna: Verlag der Österreichischen Akademie der 
Wissenschaften.
Cantwell et al. 2006 = See rNying ma rgyud ’bum Gt-i.
Ehrhard, Franz-Karl. 1980. “Tibetan Texts in the National Archives, 
Kathmandu.” JNRC 4: 233–250.
——. 1997. “Recently Discovered Manuscripts of the rNying ma 
rgyud ’bum from Nepal.” In H. Krasser et al. (eds.), Tibetan 
Studies: Proceedings of the 7th Seminar of the International 
Association for Tibetan Studies, Graz 1995, vol. 1, 253–267.
Kaneko, Eiichi. 1982 = See rNying ma rgyud ’bum Tk.
Martin, Dan. unpublished. “NGB Historical Notes: A chronologically 
arranged list of prints and manuscripts (both available and 
unavailable) of the Rnying-ma Rgyud-’bum, based mainly on 
narrative historical sources.” Unpublished version from 1995


================
1 The findings presented in this article are some of the results of two 
research projects generously funded by the Deutsche 
Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG): (a) “The Manuscript Collections of the 
Ancient Tantras (rNying ma rgyud ’bum): An Examination of Variance,” 
conducted within the framework of the Researcher Group “Manuscript 
Cultures in Asia and Africa” (FOR 963, 2008–2011), and (b) 
“Doxographical Organisational Schemes in Manuscripts and Xylographs of 
the Collection of the Ancient Tantras,” conducted within the framework of 
the Centre for the Study of Manuscript Cultures (CSMC/SFB 950, 2011–
2015), both at Universität Hamburg. I would like to take this opportunity to 
thank the Nepal Research Centre in Kathmandu for their assistance in 
various ways over this period, which greatly facilitated my research, and 
likewise thank Philip Pierce (Kathmandu) for proofreading my English. 
Thanks are also due to Kelsang Lhamo and Jeff Wallman, TBRC, for their 
help in obtaining access to some scanned material.
2 Cantwell and Mayer name the illuminated set catalogued by them, together 
with Michael Kowalewky and Jean-Luc Achard, “sGang steng-b” and the 
other, plain set from sGang steng, which was digitised later, “sGang steng-a,” justifying their decision as follows: “We adopt this nomenclature 
because, as we will explain below, we believe the finer and more expensive 
manuscript we photographed first and which is presented here was made 
later than the simpler more cheaply produced one we one (sic) discovered 
later.” (Cantwell et al. 2006: 5). They further support their assumption with 
findings gained through philological studies, but nonetheless state in their 
conclusion that they “do not yet know for certain” which set is the earliest, 
but they do justify their decision by stating that “it is more likely that the 
finer one presented here is later, since it is the more expensively made of the 
two” (ibid. 10). As I shall show below, historical sources indeed seem to 
support the assumption that the plain set (provided this is indeed the 
reported set) was produced earlier than the illuminated one. However, since 
the connection between the two sets is yet to be established, I suggest 
naming the two sets sGang steng-p and sGang steng-i (“p” standing for 
“plain” and “i” standing for “illuminated”). It is hoped that future studies—
philological, historical, or bibliographical—will help shed more light on the 
relation between the two editions and on the exact role of each of them in 
the history of the transmission of the Central Bhutanese group. To be noted 
here is that the oral tradition in sGang steng monastery is not confident in 
this regard either, though it appears that there is a tendency to believe that 
the illuminated set served as the master copy for the sets from mTshams 
brag and dGra me rtse (personal communication with sGang steng sprul sku 
at sGang steng monastery on September 9, 2009, and further verifications 
via Khenpo Seng nge rdo rje in February 2016). Cantwell and Mayer for 
their part have suggested that the mTshams brag edition is not a copy of the 
illuminated sGang steng set, but rather that both are copies of a third, as yet 
unidentified, exemplar (ibid. 9–10).
3 Although I consider the dGra med rtse edition, written in black ink on 
white paper, to be plain, it should be nonetheless noted that some efforts 
have been made to lend the edition a somewhat fairer look: the title page 
(i.e. folio 1b of each volume) is written on thicker-layered paper, held 
together by what seem to be black and red leather strips, while the resulting 
knots serve as decorative elements; textile curtains are mounted on these 
same title pages; and the written area of the first two written pages (i.e.
folios 1b and 2a of each volume) is smeared with reddish colour (see fig. 1). 
4 The microfilming of both sets was carried out under the supervision of 
Franz-Karl Ehrhard, who was at the time the director of the Nepal Research 
Centre (NRC), the NGMPP branch in Kathmandu.
5 The cataloguing of the remaining two sets, sGang steng-p and dGra med 
rtse, has clearly been less urgent for this purpose due to their great similarity 
to the two other 46-volume Bhutanese sets—mTshams brag and sGang 
steng-i—for which catalogues already exist.
5 The cataloguing of the remaining two sets, sGang steng-p and dGra med 
rtse, has clearly been less urgent for this purpose due to their great similarity 
to the two other 46-volume Bhutanese sets—mTshams brag and sGang 
steng-i—for which catalogues already exist.
6 The findings of these scientific investigations, which took place in March 
2013 in the National Archives Kathmandu, have been published in Almogi, 
Kindzorra, Hahn & Rabin 2015 and Almogi, Delhey, MacDonald & 
Pouvkova 2015.
7 Ehrhard 1980: 245–246. The volumes recorded by Ehrhard are Cha, Nya, 
Tha, Pha, Ba, Tsa, and Chi. Note, however, that in Ehrhard 1997: 254, the 
number of volumes recorded at the time is erroneously noted as being eight.
8 Ehrhard 1997: 254.
9 The first dkar chag―titled rNying ma rgyud ’bum gyi glegs bam nang gi 
chos tshan bzhugs byang dkar chag dpe rdzi bsam ’phel nor bu’i ’phreng ba
(NGMPP Reel No. L 426/4, 26 fols. = dKar chag 1)―contains the list of 
titles included in the edition. The second―titled sNga ’gyur gsang chen 
rnying ma rgyud ’bum gyi glegs bam yongs rdzogs gzheng tshul dkar chag tu 
bkod pa rdzogs ldan snang ba gsar pa’i dga’ ston (NGMPP Reel No. L 
426/5, 14 fols. = dKar chag 2)―contains a descriptive account of the 
production of the edition. Ehrhard has translated and edited two excerpts 
from the latter. His findings, summarised in the following paragraphs, are 
based on his 1997 article. 
10 The information provided in the present article regarding the overall 
organisation of the Nubri and NAK sets—including volume and text 
numbers, the identification and location of the individual texts within the 
sets, and the comparison between the two sets—is based on the current draft 
of the catalogue in Almogi (forthcoming-a).
11 On the groups of the rNying ma rgyud ’bum editions in terms of the 
history of their transmission, see below.
12 See, for example, Cantwell & Mayer 2007: 70–78; 2012: 26–30
13 The digitisation of this set was made possible thanks to the financial 
support of the DFG and fruitful cooperation with the Preservation of 
Bhutan’s Written Heritage, directed by Karma Phuntsho.
14 For a discussion of these two sets in general, and for preliminary findings 
regarding the history of the transmission of the gDong dkar la set in 
particular, see Almogi 2015.
15 A detailed catalogue of the Nubri and NAK sets is nearly completed. 
Preliminary title lists of both the gDong dkar la and the Khams editions 
have also been compiled, and detailed catalogues of both are currently under 
preparation.
16 I may add that we currently know of several other sets, which are 
unfortunately not accessible thus far. For some examples, see Almogi 2015: 
10, n. 25.

17 For more information regarding the sets listed here—including place of 
storage, publication details when applicable, details regarding their 
digitisation, existing catalogues, and accessibility—see the bibliography.
18 The identification of the set reported in historical sources as having been 
produced at the behest of Pad gling gsung sprul III with the sGang steng 
plain set is primarily based on my communication with the current sGang 
steng sprul sku. Moreover, as will be shown shortly, since the illuminated 
sGang steng set can very likely be identified with another sGang steng set 
reported in historical sources, which clearly describe it as being illuminated, 
the identification of the plain set with the one reported to have been 
produced at the behest of Pad gling gsung sprul III suggests itself rather 
forcefully.
19 Tshul rdor rnam thar (fol. 18b1–5): rje bla ma’i dgongs rdzogs su … gtso 
bor rnying ma rgyud ’bum pu sti bzhi bcu zhe drug tshang ba yig mkhan sogs 
rgyang ring mo nas bkug cing do gal bskyed de| rten bzhengs rnams ’khos* 
[= ’khur?] khyer gyis gang pher bsgrubs|. *This syllable seems to have 
undergone a correction in which the original final letter (unclear which 
letter it was) has been deleted and instead the final letter -s has been 
inserted, however, not exactly in its place but below the syllable (obviously 
due to lack of space). Note that the author of the Tshul rdor rnam thar is 
indicated by the TBRC (W8LS15799) as anonymous. However, it is made 
clear in the introductory part that this is an autobiography. This is also 
evident from the fact that the biography is written in the first person.
20 See Karma bde legs’s rGyud ’bum dkar chag (35.10–36.1), which cites an 
unspecified biography of Pad gling gsung sprul III Kun mkhyen Tshul 
khrims rdo rje as its source for this information (apparently merely relying 
on information provided by Karma Phuntsho). I have not been able to 
identify this source. Note that according to Karma bde legs (ibid. 35.17–18), 
the number of volumes are there said to be 45 (and not 46). One wonders,
however, whether there has been a confusion here with the report on the 
sGang steng illuminated set (for the Tibetan text, see note 22). 
21 The TBRC notes that 1726 as sGang steng sprul sku II’s year of death is 
questionable. However, 1726 is supported by his biography, which states 
that he died when reaching the age of 82. According to the Tibetan custom 
this is to be interpreted as his 82th year (i.e. when he was 81 years old), 
which, having been born in 1645, yields 1726. That he died in 1726 and not 
in 1727 (i.e. when he actually was 82) is further supported by the fact that
his reincarnation, sGang steng sprul sku III Kun bzang ’phrin las rnam 
rgyal, was born in 1727 (TBRC: P3AG16). The exact time of his death is 
further specified in his biography as the midnight of the 15th of the 9th month 
(i.e. “the month in which the Buddha’s Decent Festival takes place”). See
grangs brgyad cu gya gnyis bzhes pa’i skabs lha babs zla ba’i dus chen bcos 
lnga’i nam gung la mya ngan las ’das so||. The fact that sGang steng sprul 
sku II died towards the end of the Gregorian year (i.e. Nov. 9th) would mean 
that, even if the set was commissioned immediately after his death, its 
production must have stretched into 1727.
22 See the biography of sGang steng sprul sku II composed by rJe mkhan po 
X bsTan ’dzin chos rgyal (1701–1766/7; TBRC: P541), the sGang steng 
sprul sku gnyis pa’i rnam thar (208.6–12), which states: gsung rten kun 
bzang rdor sems kyi thugs bcud rgyud ’bum rin po che pusta ka grangs tshad 
bzhi bcu zhe lnga tsam yod pa| shog deb dang po’i rigs la mthing shog gser 
yig zhun ma las bgyis pa dag kyang dgongs rdzogs su dmigs te ’phral rang 
du grub bo|| de rnams kyang rgyal tshab sprul pa’i sku dang tshul ldan gyi 
skyes chen mang pos rab tu gnas par mdzad cing| slar yang sprul pa’i sku 
myur ’byon gyi gsol ’debs thugs dam yang bskul bar byas so||. See also 
Karma bde legs’s rGyud ’bum dkar chag (36.1–8), which refers to the same 
source (relying, however, on Karma Phuntsho’s report). My identification of 
the rGyal tshab with Mi pham dbang po (as silently done by Karma bde 
legs) is based on various passages in the sGang steng sprul sku gnyis pa’i 
rnam thar, including (196.12–13): … mi ring bar rje rgyal ba’i sras mi 
pham dbang po nyid rgyal tshab tu mnga’ gsol ba’i dgongs pas|…, and 
(206.8–9): … rgyal tshab sprul pa’i sku rje btsun mi pham dbang po…. Note 
that Karma bde legs states that it appears that the sGang steng illuminated 
version was made on the basis of the plain one. Also note that Cantwell and 
Mayer point out an oral tradition prevalent in sGang steng (based on oral 
communication with Karma Phuntsho) and conclude that the second 
illuminated set was produced in Me ri dkar po, a temple now lying in ruins 
above Nor bu lding across the pass from sGang steng. Cantwell & Mayer 
1997: 68–69.
23 Ngag dbang ’brug pa’i rnam thar (561.3): gzhan yang rnying ma’i 
rgyud ’bum ’di dkon par gzigs te| sku gzhogs spungs thang nas ma dpe g.yar 
po zhus| shog bu’i rtsol ba mdzad de phral du sgrub pa gnang|. Dan Martin, 
in his unpublished notes, refers to another version of this same biography.
24 The passage provided by the TBRC entry of the Sangs rgyas gling edition 
(for which see note 25) reads rab byung bcu gcig pa (i.e. the 11th sexagenary 
cycle), which would place the year zil gnon me rta noted there in 1666. I 
tentatively suggest emending the text to rab byung bcu gnyis pa (i.e. the 12th
sexagenary cycle), which would yield the year in question as 1726, and 
which, considering the fact that the birth year of mTshams brag sprul sku 
Ngag dbang ’brug pa, the commissioner of the set, is 1682, would make 
much better sense. This would mean that the production of the set had taken 
about two years (from 1726 to 1728), which could be considered long 
compared to the production of other sets, which reportedly took only several 
months. To be noted, however, is the remark found in the same passage that 
the production took many years (mi lo du ma’i ring bzhengs par grags), 
which may suggest that the author of the passage indeed took 1666 as the 
year in which the production started (so that the production stretched over 
62 years, which is indeed a long period!). Mi nyag Thub bstan chos dar, 
who has obviously paraphrased and slightly shortened this same passage, 
notes the year in which the production started as 1728. This discrepancy 
may well be an attempt by Thub bstan chos dar to make up for what he 
probably saw as a problem in the dates provided in the passage (he indeed 
completely omits the sentence that identifies 1666 as the year in which 
production started). See the mTshams brag rnying rgyud dkar chag (16.20–
21: …rab byung bcu gnyis pa sa sprel spyi lo 1728 lor bzhengs pa’i ’go 
brtsams|…). The uncertainty about the dates of production are also reflected 
in Karma bde legs’s catalogue, which identifies the year in which the project 
began as 1725 and the year in which it ended as 1748, just before mTshams 
brag sprul sku’s death. See the rGyud ’bum dkar chag (36.12–13): …lo 1725
la dbu btsugs te 1748 lo zhing du ma gshegs gong tsam du grub pa dang|….
Note that Dan Martin, in his unpublished notes, suggested that the set was 
produced around 1730.
25 TBRC: W1KG16449, “Authorship Statement”: mtshams brag rnying ma 
rgyud ’bum ni| dpal sgang steng dgon pa’i sprul sku [b]stan ’dzin legs pa’i 
don grub kyi zhal slob mtshams brag sprul sku ngag dbang grub pas rab 
byung bcu gcig [= gnyis?] pa’i zin [= zil] gnon me rta’i hor zla dang po’i 
rgyal ba gsum par dbu btsugs| rab byung bcu gnyis pa sa sprel spyil [= spyi] 
lo 1728 lor rgyud rgyal legs par grub pa ste | mi lo du ma’i ring bzhengs par 
grags| pusti 46 dang| chos tshan 904| ldeb 40399 bzhugs| ldeb ’bring bris ma| 
dbu ldeb gser bris ma yin| bris gzugs sogs spus ka shin tu legs| dkar chag mi 
bzhugs| sde dge’i rnying rgyud la mtshon na| dang po gnyis med kyi rgyud
sde a ti yo ga’i skor| de la’ang nang gses kyi yang ti’i skor dang| spyi ti’i 
skor| man ngag gi sde’i skor| klong sde’i skor| sems sde’i skor| gnyis pa ma 
rgyud a nu yo ga’i skor| de la’ang nang gses kyi rtsa ba’i mdo bzhi’i skor 
dang | mtha’ drug gi rgyud kyi skor| gsum pa pha rgyud ma hā yo ga’i skor| 
de la’ang nang gses kyi sgyu ’phrul gyi skor dang| tantra sde bco brgyad kyi 
skor| sgrub pa bka’ brgyad kyi skor bcas kyi rab dbye gnang yod||. Compare 
Mi nyag Thub bstan chos dar’s modern catalogue to the mTshams brag 
edition from 2009 which provides the same passage in a slightly 
paraphrased and shortened form. See the mTshams brag rnying rgyud dkar 
chag (16.18–17.9).
26 As I have already noted in a recent publication (Almogi 2015: 10, n. 26), 
the Sangs rgyas gling edition is referred to by the TBRC (W1KG16449) as 
mTshams brag dgon pa’i bris ma (under “Bibliographical Title”) and it is 
only under “Other Title” that it is recorded as the “Sangs rgyas gling 
manuscript of the rNying ma’i rgyud ’bum.” There I have suggested that the 
(somewhat misleading) title mTshams brag dgon pa’i bris ma was 
apparently given on the basis of a reference to mTshams brag in what seems 
to be the colophon to the entire collection provided on the TBRC entry 
under “Authorship Statement” (for the text see note 25). The source of the 
passage is not indicated in the TBRC entry. Kelsang Lhamo from the TBRC 
was not able to name its source either (email communication from 
29.02.2016). It should be noted, however, that judging by some apparent 
modern influences on the style of writing (e.g. providing the equivalent of 
the Tibetan year in the Gregorian calendar), the passage seems to have come 
from an external source rather than being the original colophon of the 
collection. Moreover, the fact that it states that there is no dkar chag also 
supports the assumption of an external, later source. Note also the fact, 
likewise supportive, that it is included in Mi nyag Thub bstan chos dar’s 
modern catalogue to the mTshams brag edition from 2009 in an almost 
verbatim form (see note 25), that is, several years before the digitisation of 
the Sangs rgyas gling set. In any case, the passage obviously reports on the 
production of the mTshams brag set and not of the Sangs rgyas gling one. 
Whether the Sangs rgyas gling set is a mTshams brag set that later on was 
transported to Sangs rgyas gling, or whether it is a copy of the mTshams 
brag set, with the passage in question reporting the production of its master 
copy, is yet to be clarified.
27 Cantwell 2002.
28 See the gTing skyes ’khrungs rabs rnam thar (49.6–50.1). See also Martin 
(unpublished).
29 Almogi 2015: 3–7.30 Some of these glosses have been discussed in Almogi 2015: 3–9. 
31 The designation of this group as “(Central Bhutanese)–Eastern Tibetan” is 
tentative and is based on preliminary study of the edition.
32 The TBRC also reports on a rNying ma rgyud ’bum set from gZhi chen 
monastery (W2PD17382). However, this set is said to consist of 39 
volumes. Since the TBRC has not released the scans yet I have not been able 
to compare the two sets and to verify whether they are one and the same set 
or different ones. Nonetheless, shortly before the publication of the present 
paper I have been able to obtain the first three volumes of the gZhi chen 
dgon set with the kind help of Kelsang Lhamo from the TBRC. A brief look 
indeed confirmed my initial intuition that the two are in a way the same set, 
as these first three volumes of the “gZhi chen dgon set” turned out to be 
identical with folders 8, 10, and 23 of the “Khams set,” respectively. Since 
according to Karma bde legs (personal communication on June, 5, 2016) the 
original set indeed comprises only 34 volumes, it is possible that the 39-
volume set reported in the TBRC consists of the 34-volume “Khams set” 
and additional supplementary volumes resulting from, most probably recent,
compilatory work by Tibetan scholars in and around gZhi chen dgon 
(possibly merely scans of already published related material, as it is the case 
with folder 34). This matter will be looked into in the coming months. 

